Boron removal documentation (#536)
watertap-org/watertap: docs/technical_reference/unit_models/boron_removal.rst

Boron Removal
=============

Introduction
------------

> Boron removal is generally applied as a desalination post-treatment after the first

Reviewer: "desalination post-treatment" sounds to me a little like a treatment after all desalination processes but this is between two RO units. Consider modifying.

> Boron removal is generally applied as a desalination post-treatment after the first

Author: ```suggestion
Boron removal is generally applied as a post-treatment process after the first

```

                    'cation_name': 'name_of_cation_species_in_additive', #[is optional]
                    'mw_additive': (value, units), #[is required]
                    'charge_additive': value, #[is required]
                  }
               }

For example, this 'chem_dict' would be passed into the model on construction as
one of the configuration options as shown below.

.. code-block::

    model.fs.unit = BoronRemoval(
            default={
                "property_package": model.fs.properties,
                "chemical_mapping_data": chem_dict,
            }
        )

**NOTE: The above example assumes you have already constructed a pyomo model named 'model' and attached an IDAES flowsheet named 'fs' to it, as well as a properties block named 'properties'**

Equations and Relationships
---------------------------
Reaction constants :math:`K_{w}` and :math:`K_{a}` are taken from the Benjamin (2010) chemistry
textbook (see References below).

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Equation"

   "Electroneutrality Constraint", ":math:`C_{H} = C_{OH} + C_{A} + Alk_{Res} - n_{caustic}*C_{caustic}`"

>    "Residual Alkalinity Expression", ":math:`Alk_{Res} = -{\sum_{i} n_i \cdotp C_{out,i} }`"

Reviewer: Is index `i` equivalent to `j` ?  This might have caused my confusion about the neutrality and alkalinity equations in the table.  Are `i` only those buffering species (to make sense of the alkalinity equation) ?  This should probably be clarified better.  Maybe also add clarification for the exact alkalinity definition here, i.e., total or carbonate.

Author: Added a note below the table.

Reviewer: Related to my comment in the next lines, I think the note of "stream after the first RO" isn't agreeing with this equation too, which calculates on the outlet of this pH increasing unit.  Did I miss something?

Reviewer: Related to my comment in the next lines, I think the note of "stream after the first RO" isn't agreeing with this equation too, which calculates on the outlet of this pH increasing unit.  Did I miss something?

   "Total Boron Balance Constraint", ":math:`C_{in,HA} + C_{in,A} = C_{HA} + C_{A}`"
   "Water Dissociation Constraint", ":math:`K_{w} = C_{H} \cdotp C_{OH}`"
   "Boron Dissociation Constraint", ":math:`K_{a} \cdotp C_{HA} = C_{H} \cdotp C_{A}`"
   "Component (for Boron, Borate, Protons, and Hydroxide) mass balance", ":math:`0 = - M_{i,out} + C_{i} \cdotp Q`"

>    "Caustic cation mass balance", ":math:`0 = C_{caustic,in} - M_{caustic,out} + S_{caustic}`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Caustic cation mass balance", ":math:`0 = M_{caustic,in} - M_{caustic,out} + S_{caustic}`"

```

   "Caustic cation gain rate", ":math:`S_{caustic} = Q \cdotp \frac{D}{MW}`"

**NOTE:** :math:`Q` **is defined as the total volumetric flow rate and** :math:`S_{j}` **is the source/sink term for component** :math:`j`

**NOTE:** :math:`C_{H}` **is the proton concentration,** :math:`C_{OH}` **is the hydroxide concentration,** :math:`C_{A}` **is the Borate concentration, and** :math:`C_{HA}` **is the Boron concentration.**

**NOTE:** :math:`n_{i}` **is ion charge of component** :math:`i`

> **NOTE:** :math:`C_{in,i}` **is the concentration from the inlet stream and** :math:`C_{out,i}` **is the resulting concentration in the outlet stream**
> 
> References

Author: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** :math:`C_{in,i}` **is the concentration from the inlet stream and** :math:`C_{out,i}` **is the resulting concentration in the outlet stream**

**NOTE:** :math:`Alk_{Res}` **is the approximate total alkalinity of the stream after the first RO stage and is summed over all ions that are not hydroxide or borate ions (which are already included in the electroneutrality balance)**

References

```

                  'caustic_additive':
                  {
                    'additive_name': 'name_of_the_actual_chemical', #[is optional]
                    'cation_name': 'name_of_cation_species_in_additive', #[is optional]
                    'mw_additive': (value, units), #[is required]
                    'charge_additive': value, #[is required]
                  }
               }

For example, this 'chem_dict' would be passed into the model on construction as
one of the configuration options as shown below.

.. code-block::

    model.fs.unit = BoronRemoval(
            default={
                "property_package": model.fs.properties,
                "chemical_mapping_data": chem_dict,
            }
        )

**NOTE: The above example assumes you have already constructed a pyomo model named 'model' and attached an IDAES flowsheet named 'fs' to it, as well as a properties block named 'properties'**

Equations and Relationships
---------------------------
Reaction constants :math:`K_{w}` and :math:`K_{a}` are taken from the Benjamin (2010) chemistry
textbook (see References below).

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Equation"

>    "Electroneutrality Constraint", ":math:`C_{H} = C_{OH} + C_{A} + Alk_{Res} - n_{caustic}*C_{caustic}`"

Reviewer: Is this equation applying to the steady state condition in the control volume?  (although the volume concept is vague for 0d or the cstr condition is assumed)  In other words, is this essentially an equation on the outlet?  Maybe note n_caustic is charge. Consider making this clearer.

Author: Yes, this is the steady-state condition of the 0D control volume and these would represent outlet concentrations. I will change a few things to make this more clear.

>    "Electroneutrality Constraint", ":math:`C_{H} = C_{OH} + C_{A} + Alk_{Res} - n_{caustic}*C_{caustic}`"

Reviewer: Is this equation applying to the steady state condition in the control volume?  (although the volume concept is vague for 0d or the cstr condition is assumed)  In other words, is this essentially an equation on the outlet?  Maybe note n_caustic is charge. Consider making this clearer.

>    "Electroneutrality Constraint", ":math:`C_{H} = C_{OH} + C_{A} + Alk_{Res} - n_{caustic}*C_{caustic}`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Electroneutrality Constraint", ":math:`C_{out,H} = C_{out,OH} + C_{out,A} + Res_{ions} - n_{caustic}*C_{caustic added}`"

```

>    "Residual Alkalinity Expression", ":math:`Alk_{Res} = -{\sum_{i} n_i \cdotp C_{out,i} }`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Residual Ions Expression", ":math:`Res_{ions} = -{\sum_{i} n_i \cdotp C_{out,i} }`"

```

>    "Total Boron Balance Constraint", ":math:`C_{in,HA} + C_{in,A} = C_{HA} + C_{A}`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Total Boron Balance Constraint", ":math:`C_{in,HA} + C_{in,A} = C_{out,HA} + C_{out,A}`"

```

>    "Water Dissociation Constraint", ":math:`K_{w} = C_{H} \cdotp C_{OH}`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Water Dissociation Constraint", ":math:`K_{w} = C_{out,H} \cdotp C_{out,OH}`"

```

>    "Boron Dissociation Constraint", ":math:`K_{a} \cdotp C_{HA} = C_{H} \cdotp C_{A}`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Boron Dissociation Constraint", ":math:`K_{a} \cdotp C_{out,HA} = C_{out,H} \cdotp C_{out,A}`"

```

>    "Component (for Boron, Borate, Protons, and Hydroxide) mass balance", ":math:`0 = - M_{i,out} + C_{i} \cdotp Q`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Component (for Boron, Borate, Protons, and Hydroxide) mass balance", ":math:`0 = - M_{out,i} + C_{out,i} \cdotp Q`"

```

>    "Caustic cation mass balance", ":math:`0 = M_{caustic,in} - M_{caustic,out} + S_{caustic}`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Caustic cation mass balance", ":math:`0 = M_{caustic,in} - M_{caustic,out} + S_{caustic added}`"

```

>    "Caustic cation gain rate", ":math:`S_{caustic} = Q \cdotp \frac{D}{MW}`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Caustic cation gain rate", ":math:`S_{caustic added} = Q \cdotp \frac{D}{MW}`"

```

**NOTE:** :math:`Q` **is defined as the total volumetric flow rate and** :math:`S_{j}` **is the source/sink term for component** :math:`j`

> **NOTE:** :math:`C_{H}` **is the proton concentration,** :math:`C_{OH}` **is the hydroxide concentration,** :math:`C_{A}` **is the Borate concentration, and** :math:`C_{HA}` **is the Boron concentration.**

Author: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** :math:`C_{p,H}` **is the proton concentration,** :math:`C_{p,OH}` **is the hydroxide concentration,** :math:`C_{p,A}` **is the Borate concentration, and** :math:`C_{p,HA}` **is the Boron concentration.** :math:`p` **represents either in or out**

```

**NOTE:** :math:`n_{i}` **is ion charge of component** :math:`i`

**NOTE:** :math:`C_{in,i}` **is the concentration from the inlet stream and** :math:`C_{out,i}` **is the resulting concentration in the outlet stream**

> **NOTE:** :math:`Alk_{Res}` **is the approximate total alkalinity of the stream after the first RO stage and is summed over all ions that are not hydroxide or borate ions (which are already included in the electroneutrality balance)**

Reviewer: I still don't think this is clear enough.  If the model is ran on a solution containing "conservative ions (those with little buffering ability / unaffected by pH)", the equation would not be right to calculate the alkalinity.  This should probably be clarified. Also is the "stream after the first RO" be the inlet stream of this unit? If so , would that be right for the charge balance equation?

Author: (1) You bring up a good point. This calculation is not the true alkalinity, because these species would change as pH changes. However, we are simplifying this analysis to focus solely on boron dissociation. Presumably, most all other ions that contribute to the buffering capacity would have been removed from the 1st RO stage, so any changes in their concentrations would be minimal compared to changes in boron/borate speciation. 

Maybe it would be best to rename or reword this. This is mostly what ever are the residual conservative ions in solution (the ones that are not explicitly being calculated for). This is related to alkalinity (that is why I labeled it as 'residual alkalinity'), but is not the actual solution alkalinity. 

(2) Because the species (specifically anything not H+, OH-, Boron, and Borate) in this calculation are assumed unchanged from inlet to outlet, their concentrations inside the domain are the same as the concentrations from the 1st RO stage. 

Maybe it would be best to label this term as 'Remaining Charge' rather than residual Alkalinity.

> **NOTE:** :math:`Alk_{Res}` **is the approximate total alkalinity of the stream after the first RO stage and is summed over all ions that are not hydroxide or borate ions (which are already included in the electroneutrality balance)**

Reviewer: I still don't think this is clear enough.  If the model is ran on a solution containing "conservative ions (those with little buffering ability / unaffected by pH)", the equation would not be right to calculate the alkalinity.  This should probably be clarified. Also is the "stream after the first RO" be the inlet stream of this unit? If so , would that be right for the charge balance equation?

Reviewer: Oh I just realized that, for the conservative ions, cation and anions should cancel each other so that equation will still be correct. So this one can be dismissed or consider clarify it to avoid the type of confusion I had.  Good exercise for me to refresh those solution chemistry.

> **NOTE:** :math:`Alk_{Res}` **is the approximate total alkalinity of the stream after the first RO stage and is summed over all ions that are not hydroxide or borate ions (which are already included in the electroneutrality balance)**

Author: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** :math:`Res_{ions}` **is the sum over all ions that are not hydroxide or borate ions (which are already included in the electroneutrality balance) that are needed to enforce electroneutrality**

```

   "Boron Dissociation Constraint", ":math:`K_{a} \cdotp C_{HA} = C_{H} \cdotp C_{A}`"
   "Component (for Boron, Borate, Protons, and Hydroxide) mass balance", ":math:`0 = - M_{i,out} + C_{i} \cdotp Q`"
   "Caustic cation mass balance", ":math:`0 = M_{caustic,in} - M_{caustic,out} + S_{caustic}`"

   "Caustic cation gain rate", ":math:`S_{caustic} = Q \cdotp \frac{D}{MW}`"

**NOTE:** :math:`Q` **is defined as the total volumetric flow rate and** :math:`S_{j}` **is the source/sink term for component** :math:`j`

**NOTE:** :math:`C_{H}` **is the proton concentration,** :math:`C_{OH}` **is the hydroxide concentration,** :math:`C_{A}` **is the Borate concentration, and** :math:`C_{HA}` **is the Boron concentration.**

**NOTE:** :math:`n_{i}` **is ion charge of component** :math:`i`

**NOTE:** :math:`C_{in,i}` **is the concentration from the inlet stream and** :math:`C_{out,i}` **is the resulting concentration in the outlet stream**

**NOTE:** :math:`Alk_{Res}` **is the approximate total alkalinity of the stream after the first RO stage and is summed over all ions that are not hydroxide or borate ions (which are already included in the electroneutrality balance)**

References

> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

                  'caustic_additive':
                  {
                    'additive_name': 'name_of_the_actual_chemical', #[is optional]
                    'cation_name': 'name_of_cation_species_in_additive', #[is optional]
                    'mw_additive': (value, units), #[is required]
                    'charge_additive': value, #[is required]
                  }
               }

For example, this 'chem_dict' would be passed into the model on construction as
one of the configuration options as shown below.

.. code-block::

    model.fs.unit = BoronRemoval(
            default={
                "property_package": model.fs.properties,
                "chemical_mapping_data": chem_dict,
            }
        )

**NOTE: The above example assumes you have already constructed a pyomo model named 'model' and attached an IDAES flowsheet named 'fs' to it, as well as a properties block named 'properties'**

Equations and Relationships
---------------------------
Reaction constants :math:`K_{w}` and :math:`K_{a}` are taken from the Benjamin (2010) chemistry
textbook (see References below).

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Equation"

>    "Electroneutrality Constraint", ":math:`C_{out,H} = C_{out,OH} + C_{out,A} + Res_{ions} - n_{caustic}*C_{caustic added}`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Electroneutrality Constraint", ":math:`C_{out,H} = C_{out,OH} + C_{out,A} + Res_{ions} - n_{caustic}*C_{caustic_added}`"

```

   "Residual Ions Expression", ":math:`Res_{ions} = -{\sum_{i} n_i \cdotp C_{out,i} }`"

   "Total Boron Balance Constraint", ":math:`C_{in,HA} + C_{in,A} = C_{out,HA} + C_{out,A}`"

   "Water Dissociation Constraint", ":math:`K_{w} = C_{out,H} \cdotp C_{out,OH}`"

   "Boron Dissociation Constraint", ":math:`K_{a} \cdotp C_{out,HA} = C_{out,H} \cdotp C_{out,A}`"

   "Component (for Boron, Borate, Protons, and Hydroxide) mass balance", ":math:`0 = - M_{out,i} + C_{out,i} \cdotp Q`"

>    "Caustic cation mass balance", ":math:`0 = M_{caustic,in} - M_{caustic,out} + S_{caustic added}`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Caustic cation mass balance", ":math:`0 = M_{caustic,in} - M_{caustic,out} + S_{caustic_added}`"

```

>    "Caustic cation gain rate", ":math:`S_{caustic added} = Q \cdotp \frac{D}{MW}`"

Author: ```suggestion
   "Caustic cation gain rate", ":math:`S_{caustic_added} = Q \cdotp \frac{D}{MW}`"

```

                    'cation_name': 'name_of_cation_species_in_additive', #[is required]
                    'mw_additive': (value, units), #[is required]
                    'moles_cation_per_additive': value, #[is required]
                  }
               }

For example, this 'chem_dict' would be passed into the model on construction as
one of the configuration options as shown below.

.. code-block::

    model.fs.unit = BoronRemoval(
            default={
                "property_package": model.fs.properties,
                "chemical_mapping_data": chem_dict,
            }
        )

**NOTE: The above example assumes you have already constructed a pyomo model named 'model' and attached an IDAES flowsheet named 'fs' to it, as well as a properties block named 'properties'**

Equations and Relationships
---------------------------
Reaction constants :math:`K_{w}` and :math:`K_{a}` are taken from the Benjamin (2010) chemistry
textbook (see References below).

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Equation"

   "Electroneutrality Constraint", ":math:`C_{out,H} = C_{out,OH} + C_{out,A} + Res_{ions}`"

>    "Residual Ions Expression", ":math:`Res_{ions} = -{\sum_{i} n_i \cdotp C_{out,i} }`"

Reviewer: The separation of "residual ions" seems to be an extra layer of reading, although it may fascinate the coding.  A clearer version could be combining these two equations into one, as something like  left_side + other cations = right side + other anions.   But ok as it is.

                  'caustic_additive':
                  {
                    'additive_name': 'name_of_the_actual_chemical', #[is optional]
                    'cation_name': 'name_of_cation_species_in_additive', #[is optional]
                    'mw_additive': (value, units), #[is required]
                    'charge_additive': value, #[is required]
                  }
               }

For example, this 'chem_dict' would be passed into the model on construction as
one of the configuration options as shown below.

.. code-block::

    model.fs.unit = BoronRemoval(
            default={
                "property_package": model.fs.properties,
                "chemical_mapping_data": chem_dict,
            }
        )

**NOTE: The above example assumes you have already constructed a pyomo model named 'model' and attached an IDAES flowsheet named 'fs' to it, as well as a properties block named 'properties'**

Equations and Relationships
---------------------------
Reaction constants :math:`K_{w}` and :math:`K_{a}` are taken from the Benjamin (2010) chemistry
textbook (see References below).

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Equation"

>    "Electroneutrality Constraint", ":math:`C_{out,H} = C_{out,OH} + C_{out,A} + Res_{ions} - n_{caustic}*C_{caustic_added}`"

Reviewer: Is this `C_{caustic_added}` the caustic concentration at which time or port?  Is it  D/MW in the last equation?  So thinking of this in a CSTR, the caustic concentration behaves as a step function at time zero. Say you dosed 10g into a 1L volume, making it 10g/L as an inlet concentration .  Immediately, caustic concentration drops to 2g/L with 8g/L having reacted with Boron, so giving an outlet concentration of 2g/L.  Is the `C_{caustic_added}` the 10 g/L or 2 g/L?   By its name, it sounds like the added 10 g/L of  inlet caustic concentration, but the equation suggests it should be 2g/L, i.e., the outlet caustic concentration.

Author: I am somewhat confused by this comment. You appear to be commenting on an old version of the docs. This has all been changed per our conversations last week.
